.TH oob 1
.UC 5
.SH NAME
oob \- OOC symbol file browser
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B oob
.RI [ options ]
.I <module>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B oob
displays the interface definition of a module, based on information
extracted from the module's symbol file.  It accepts a single
argument, the name of a module.  The contents of the symbol file are
written to
.I stdout
in an extended module syntax.  Compared an Oberon-2 module, it differs
in these points:
.TP
Expanded Module Names
The module part of a type name is expanded to the full name of the
module.  That is, aliases assigned through import statements are
discarded.
.TP
Inherited Fields
With
.BR -x ,
a record type shows the list of all its fields, including the ones it
inherits from its base types.
.TP
Type-bound Procedures
With
.BR -x ,
a record definition lists all type-bound procedures associated with it
within its
.B RECORD ... END
block, and includes both local and inherited procedures.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --config <file>
Use given file as configuration file.
.TP
.B --repository <directory>, -r <directory>
Add a directory to the list of repositories.
.TP
.B --extended, -x
For records, include inherited fields and type-bound procedures in the
output.  By default, only the local fields of the record and all
type-bound procedures that are not redefinition of existing ones are
displayed.
.TP
.B --help, -h
Write short usage summary and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.I OO2CRC
holds the name of the configuration file.
.I OOC_REPS
is a list of repository paths, separated by colons (:).  Empty paths
are ignored.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit status is 0 on success, and 1 otherwise.
.SH SEE ALSO
oo2c(1), OOC2 Reference Manual
.SH AUTHOR
Michael van Acken <mva@users.sf.net>
