Requirements:
  oo2c 1.5.3.2
  libxml (the CVS tree dated 20000731)
  GNU make
  GNU diff (or remove "-u" from tests/Makefile)

Make sure that libxml/src/ is in the search path for *.Mod and *.c
(e.g., by editing and including .oo2crc_local).  Set the environment
variable OOC to point to your oo2c compiler.  Then, do "make test" in
the root directory.  If this produces an error, mail me.


An overview over the modules is in src/AllModules.Mod.  Another point
of entry are the test programs.  Currently, the most "evolved" test
programs are src/TestSymTab.Mod (tests/symtab/) and
src/TestInterfaceGen.Mod (tests/interface/).

The general idea of the module structure is: split functionality in
clearly separated subtrees, and have automated tests for all of them.
Here is a list of subsystems:

  configuration (Config:*, OOC:Config:*)
  repository handling (OOC:Repository:*)
  scanner (OOC:Scanner:*)
  abstract syntax tree (OOC:AST:*)
  symbol table (OOC:SymbolTable:*)
  documentation (OOC:Doc:*)
  build engine (OOC:Make:*)

Tests are located in the tests/ subdirectory.  The whole set of tests
is run by doing "make test" in the top-level directory or within
tests/.  To run tests selectively "cd" into the subdirectory and do
"make test".  This requires that the environment variables "OOC" and
"DIFF" are set.  The latter selects the diff command that is run when
comparing files.

For "make doc" to work, set the name for the oocn tool at the
beginning of the Makefile.  You will also need oo2c-1.5.3.1 (because
of a bug in oocn exposed by the XML sources) and XML sources more
recent than v2.1 (because of some documentation syntax errors in the
libxml sources).  The oo2c patch is at
http://pweb.de.uu.net/vanacken.do/ooc/oo2c-patches/, and the up to
date XML sources are available via CVS.


"make clean" returns the file tree to a pristine state, removing all
the files that were produced during compilation and testing.


-- Michael van Acken <mia@de.uu.net>
